
# Badminton and the Science of Rule Making
## By Jason Hartline and Robert Kleinberg
### Huffington Post, August 13, 2012


On July 31 badminton fans were dealt an Olympic injustice, watching in
disbelief as athletes deliberately served into the net and hit wayward
shots in an attempt to lose a match. The gravest injustice, however,
took place well before the games began, when tournament organizers
changed the event's format, resulting in a Catch-22 that pitted the
goal of winning the tournament against the principles of
sportsmanship. On Aug. 1, four teams were disqualified for "not using
one's best efforts to win a match" and "conducting oneself in a manner
that is clearly abusive or detrimental to the sport." The irony is
that the athletes, in fact, were making their best effort to win an
Olympic medal, while it was the tournament rules that ultimately
encouraged play that is detrimental to the sport.

There is a science that studies the design of rules for strategic
play, and it is called mechanism design. In the general framework of
mechanism design, a planner asks how the rules of a system should be
devised so that when participants behave strategically, a desirable
outcome is achieved. It has been applied with great success to a wide
range of problems, such as matching medical school graduates to
hospitals, allocating takeoff and landing slots at airports, selling
advertisements on the Internet, and voting in elections.

Applied to sporting events, mechanism design dictates that losing a
match should never improve a team's chances of winning a
tournament. That principle was violated in Olympic badminton when an
upset loss by the world's second-ranked team gave the remaining teams
an incentive to lose their final round-robin match and thus avoid an
unfavorable pairing against strong opponents in the playoff stage of
the competition. Ironically, this problem can never arise in a
single-elimination tournament, the format in use from badminton's
Olympic debut up until this year.

Outside the sports arena, mechanism design has a widespread influence
on public policy. For example, in the last few years Boston and
Chicago followed the advice of economists in adopting improved
mechanisms for matching children to public schools. Under the previous
systems, which attempted to give as many students as possible their
first choice, families that listed their favorite schools honestly
were at a disadvantage to those that deliberately listed a school that
was good but not over-demanded as their first or second choice.

Similar considerations are at play, of course, any time a voter casts
a ballot for a candidate who is deemed electable rather than "wasting"
a vote on his or her top choice. Opportunities for tactical voting are
reduced by instant-runoff voting, a system where voters cast ballots
ranking the candidates in order of preference. A proposal to adopt
this system for parliamentary elections in the UK (where it is known
as the Alternative Vote) was regrettably defeated in a highly
publicized 2011 referendum. Similar initiatives were also rejected in
several U.S. states but have been adopted in cities including San
Francisco and Minneapolis.

People and firms become much better at cheating when large sums of
money are at stake, so it is vital for governments to get the details
right in complex resource allocation protocols, as when the FCC sells
spectrum licenses to wireless companies. In one memorable manipulation
of that system, firms circumvented the rules against collusion by
using the trailing digits of their bids to send coded signals to their
competitors. The FCC has since been in close contact with auction
theorists in implementing more transparent mechanisms.

These successes and failures point to a few simple lessons. Even
seemingly common-sense protocols can be susceptible to subtle
manipulations, and it is counterproductive to condemn those who engage
in such abuses while perpetuating the rules that allow them to benefit
by doing so. Rather than using guesswork to assess the vulnerability
of a proposed system, there is a well-developed body of science that
can be applied. In many cases, when a system is found to be
manipulable, there is a surprisingly easy way to fix it.

The next time we bemoan people exploiting loopholes to subvert the
intent of rule makers, instead of asking, "What's wrong with those
people?" let's instead ask, "What's wrong with the rules?" and then
adopt a scientifically principled approach to fixing them.

---

Jason Hartline is an associate professor at Northwestern University.

Robert Kleinberg is an assistant professor at Cornell University.